docs/mathematics/linear_algebra/subspace.md, before:

# Subspace

## Description

A subspace is any subset of $R_n$ which is also a vector space over $R_n$.

<img src="image2.jpg" style="width:2.23057in" />

When $V$ (a random subset) is a subspace of $R_n$, it means:

- $V$ contains the zero vector
- If $\vec{x}$ is in $V$, for every scalar of it, the result is in $V$ also
- if $\vec{a}$ is in $V$ and $\vec{b}$ is in $V$, the addition of them is in $V$ also

## Basis

A basis for a subspace $S$ of $R_n$ is a set of vectors in $S$ that is linearly independent and is maximal with this property (that is, adding any other vector in $S$ to this subset makes the resulting set linearly dependent).

- A space can have multiple basis
- A basis should be linearly independent
- Two units $i$ and $j$ are **standard basis** of $R_2$

  <img src="image4.jpg" style="width:5.18333in" />

## Kernel

The kernel of a linear map, also known as the null space, is the linear subspace of the domain of the map which is mapped to the zero vector.

<img src="image1.jpg" style="width:2.5in" />

<img src="image3.png" style="width:3in" />

Commit message:

📝 image tables to md tables - step 3 | image math to md math - step 3

docs/mathematics/linear_algebra/subspace.md, after:

# Subspace

## Description

A subspace is any subset of $R_n$ which is also a vector space over $R_n$.

When $V$ (a random subset) is a subspace of $R_n$, it means:

- $V$ contains the zero vector
- If $\vec{x}$ is in $V$, for every scalar of it, the result is in $V$ also
- if $\vec{a}$ is in $V$ and $\vec{b}$ is in $V$, the addition of them is in $V$ also

## Basis

A basis for a subspace $S$ of $R_n$ is a set of vectors in $S$ that is linearly independent and is maximal with this property (that is, adding any other vector in $S$ to this subset makes the resulting set linearly dependent).

- A space can have multiple basis
- A basis should be linearly independent
- Two units $i$ and $j$ are **standard basis** of $R_2$

  $\mathbf{e_x} = (1, 0), \quad \mathbf{e_y} = (0, 1).$

  Similarly, the standard basis for the three-dimensional space $\mathbb{R}^3$ is formed by vectors

  $\mathbf{e_x} = (1, 0, 0), \quad \mathbf{e_y} = (0, 1, 0), \quad \mathbf{e_z} = (0, 0, 1).$

## Kernel

The kernel of a linear map, also known as the null space, is the linear subspace of the domain of the map which is mapped to the zero vector.

Kernel and image of a linear map $L$ from $V$ to $W$:

<img src="image3.png" style="width:3in" />
