docs/mathematics/fundamentals/sets.md, before:

# Sets

## Description

A set is an unordered collection of distinct objects, called elements or members of the set. A set is said to contain its elements. We write $a ∈ A$ to denote that a is an element of the set $A$. The notation $a ∉ A$ denotes that a is not an element of the set $A$.

## Popular sets

- $N = {0, 1, 2, 3,…}$, the set of all natural numbers
- $Z = {…,−2,−1, 0, 1, 2,…}$, the set of all integers
- $Z+ = {1, 2, 3,…}$, the set of all positive integers
- $Q = {p∕q ∣ p ∈ Z,q ∈ Z, and q ≠ 0}$, the set of all rational numbers
- $R$, the set of all real numbers
- $R+$, the set of all positive real numbers
- $C$ is the set of all complex numbers

## Subsets

The set $A$ is a subset of $B$, and $B$ is a superset of $A$, if and only if every element of $A$ is also an element of $B$. We use the notation $A ⊆ B$ to indicate that $A$ is a subset of the set $B$. If, instead, we want to stress that $B$ is a superset of $A$, we use the equivalent notation $B ⊇ A$.(So, $A ⊆ B$ and $B ⊇ A$ are equivalent statements.)

## Operations

### Cartesian Products

Let $A$ and $B$ be sets. The Cartesian product of $A$ and $B$, denoted by $A × B$, is the set of all ordered pairs $(a, b)$, where $a ∈ A$ and $b ∈ B$. Hence,

$A × B ={(a, b) ∣ a ∈ A ∧ b ∈ B}$

### Union

Let $A$ and $B$ be sets. The union of the sets $A$ and $B$, denoted by $A ∪ B$, is the set that contains those elements that are either in $A$ or in $B$, or in both.

<img src="image2.jpg" style="width:2.92413in" />

### Intersection

Let $A$ and $B$ be sets. The intersection of the sets $A$ and $B$, denoted by $A ∩ B$, is the set containing those elements in both $A$ and $B$.

<img src="image1.jpg" style="width:2.73184in" />

### Diﬀerence

Let $A$ and $B$ be sets. The diﬀerence of $A$ and $B$, denoted by $A − B$, is the set containing those elements that are in $A$ but not in $B$. The diﬀerence of $A$ and $B$ is also called the complement of B with respect to $A$.

### Complement

Let $U$ be the universal set. The complement of the set $A$, denoted by $-A$, is the complement of $A$ with respect to $U$. Therefore, the complement of the set $-A$ is $U − A$

### Identities

<img src="image3.jpg" style="width:4.55767in" />

Commit message:

📝 text math to md math - step 2

docs/mathematics/fundamentals/sets.md, after:

# Sets

## Description

A set is an unordered collection of distinct objects, called elements or members of the set. A set is said to contain its elements. We write $a \in A$ to denote that a is an element of the set $A$. The notation $a \notin A$ denotes that a is not an element of the set $A$.

## Popular sets

- $\mathbb{N} = \{ 0, 1, 2, 3, \ldots \}$, the set of all natural numbers
- $\mathbb{Z} = \{ \ldots, -2, -1, 0, 1, 2, \ldots \}$, the set of all integers
- $\mathbb{Z}^+ = \{ 1, 2, 3, \ldots \}$, the set of all positive integers
- $\mathbb{Q} = \left\{ \frac{p}{q} \ \middle| \ p \in \mathbb{Z}, \ q \in \mathbb{Z}, \ \text{and} \ q \neq 0 \right\}$, the set of all rational numbers
- $\mathbb{R}$, the set of all real numbers
- $\mathbb{R}^+$, the set of all positive real numbers
- $\mathbb{C}$, is the set of all complex numbers

## Subsets

The set $A$ is a subset of $B$, and $B$ is a superset of $A$, if and only if every element of $A$ is also an element of $B$. We use the notation $A \subseteq B$ to indicate that $A$ is a subset of the set $B$. If, instead, we want to stress that $B$ is a superset of $A$, we use the equivalent notation $B \supseteq A$.(So, $A \subseteq B$ and $B \supseteq A$ are equivalent statements.)

## Operations

### Cartesian Products

Let $A$ and $B$ be sets. The Cartesian product of $A$ and $B$, denoted by $A \times B$, is the set of all ordered pairs $(a, b)$, where $a \in A$ and $b \in B$. Hence,

$A \times B = \{ (a, b) \mid a \in A \land b \in B \}$

### Union

Let $A$ and $B$ be sets. The union of the sets $A$ and $B$, denoted by $A \cup B$, is the set that contains those elements that are either in $A$ or in $B$, or in both.

<img src="image2.jpg" style="width:2.92413in" />

### Intersection

Let $A$ and $B$ be sets. The intersection of the sets $A$ and $B$, denoted by $A \cap B$, is the set containing those elements in both $A$ and $B$.

<img src="image1.jpg" style="width:2.73184in" />

### Diﬀerence

Let $A$ and $B$ be sets. The diﬀerence of $A$ and $B$, denoted by $A - B$, is the set containing those elements that are in $A$ but not in $B$. The diﬀerence of $A$ and $B$ is also called the complement of B with respect to $A$.

### Complement

Let $U$ be the universal set. The complement of the set $A$, denoted by $-A$, is the complement of $A$ with respect to $U$. Therefore, the complement of the set $-A$ is $U - A$

### Identities

<img src="image3.jpg" style="width:4.55767in" />
