docs/data_science/metrics/precision.md, before:

# Precision (PPV) [Classification] [Imbalance]

## Description

Precision gauges the ratio of correctly identified positive instances to the total instances predicted as positive by the model.
It is also referred to as **positive predictive value (PPV)**.

Precision proves valuable in scenarios where the expense associated with false positives is significant.

## Formula

$$
\text{Precision} = \frac{\text{Number of relevant retrieved instances}}{\text{All retrieved instances}}
$$

- **Relevant retrieved instances**: Total correctly identified positive instances (True Positives)
- **All retrieved instances**: Total instances predicted as positive (True Positives + False Positives)

## Example

=== "Text"

    If a RAG system retrieves 10 documents for a query, and 4 of them are relevant, then Precision would be $4/10 = 0.4$

=== "Code"

    ```python
    from sklearn.metrics import precision_score

    y_true = [1, 0, 1, 1, 0]
    y_pred = [1, 0, 1, 0, 0]  # TP=2, FP=0, TN=2, FN=1

    print(precision_score(y_true, y_pred))  # 1.0
    ```

Commit message:

📝 update MRR, Precision, Recall docs and add NDCG doc for clarity

docs/data_science/metrics/precision.md, after:

# Precision (PPV) [Classification] [Imbalance]

## Description

Precision gauges the ratio of correctly identified positive instances to the total instances predicted as positive by the model.
It is also referred to as **positive predictive value (PPV)**.

Precision proves valuable in scenarios where the expense associated with false positives is significant.

!!! info

    A higher Precision indicates that a larger proportion of the retrieved documents are relevant.

## Formula

$$
\text{Precision} = \frac{\text{Number of relevant retrieved instances}}{\text{All retrieved instances}}
$$

- **Relevant retrieved instances**: Total correctly identified positive instances (True Positives)
- **All retrieved instances**: Total instances predicted as positive (True Positives + False Positives)

## Example

=== "Text"

    If a RAG system retrieves 10 documents for a query, and 4 of them are relevant, then Precision would be $4/10 = 0.4$

=== "Code"

    ```python
    from sklearn.metrics import precision_score

    y_true = [1, 0, 1, 1, 0]
    y_pred = [1, 0, 1, 0, 0]  # TP=2, FP=0, TN=2, FN=1

    print(precision_score(y_true, y_pred))  # 1.0
    ```
